i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/he

Metal hydride reactor for output temperature
control
€lbig b, S. Go
€ltz a, J. Heidingsfeld a, A. Rentz a,
D. Gehring a, M. Ko
O. Sawodny a, M. Linder b, I. Bürger b,*
a

Institute for System Dynamics, University of Stuttgart, Waldburgstr. 17/19, 70563, Stuttgart, Germany
German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Engineering Thermodynamics, Thermal Process Technology,
Pfaffenwaldring 38-40, 70569, Stuttgart, Germany

b

highlights
 Precise temperature control required for extended lifetime of fuel cells.
 Metal hydride module suggested as active thermal energy buffer for T-control.
 0D model identified and validated with experimental data of metal hydride reactor.
 Designed controller successfully demonstrates T-stabilization at 70  C.
 Response time of fluid outlet temperature of MH reactor is < 5 s.

article info

abstract

Article history:

Precise temperature control of fuel cell stacks is crucial to avoid degradation mechanisms

Received 11 April 2023

and thus to extend lifetime. The present study demonstrates that metal hydride based

Received in revised form

modules can assist in controlling this temperature by serving as active thermal energy

1 September 2023

storage. The reversible reaction of metals with hydrogen is characterized by a temperature

Accepted 4 October 2023

pressure correlation. Therefore, the temperature as well as the thermal power at which the

Available online 28 October 2023

thermal energy is released can be defined by the gas pressure. This enables the design of
temperature controllers using the pressure as actuating variable on the metal hydride

Keywords:

device. In this study, an existing metal hydride reactor based on LaNi4.85Al0.15 is integrated

Metal hydride

into a hydrogen and cooling fluid testing infrastructure. Based on experiments indicating

Thermochemical storages

the step response behaviour, the parameters for a 0D model have been identified. A PI

Model identification

controller was designed based on simulations and implemented on the test rig hardware.

Active temperature control

First experimental results show that it is possible to stabilize the temperature of the
cooling fluid circuit to 70 C ± 1.5 K while a thermal power of þ755 W/kgMH and 140 W/kgMH
is provided for absorption and desorption, respectively.
© 2023 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: inga.buerger@dlr.de (I. Bürger).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2023.10.045
0360-3199/© 2023 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

1.

Introduction

The commercialization of fuel cells has already started in the
last decade, while there are still challenges for research like
long-term durability of fuel cells in automotive applications
[1]. Reducing degradation of fuel cells leads to a longer life
time and thus to lower costs and higher sustainability of the
fuel cell technology [2]. Fuel cells degrade in their performance
over time due to mechanical, chemical and thermal mechanisms [3]. Thereby, mechanical failures have the highest
occurrence potential and are considered as the main cause of
early fuel cell failures [4,5]. In automotive applications the fuel
cell is exposed to varying operation condition, leading to
changes of the electrode potential, stoichiometric ratio of the
supplied gases, internal temperature and humidity conditions
[1]. Most of the mechanical degradation mechanisms as
shrinking-swelling, fatigue, side chain scission processes and
wrinkles are triggered by humidity fluctuations due to dynamic load changes or start ups and shutdowns [1,6]. For
example low humidity and high temperatures lead among
other aspects to an approximately ten time lesser lifetime of
fuel cells in mobile application in comparison to operating as a
fixed power source [7]. Furthermore, it could be shown that
reducing the amplitude and frequency of humidity cycling
leads to an increase of the membrane durability [8]. Therefore,
in order to extend lifetime and reduce cost, the humidity and
thus the temperature control of proton-exchange membrane
fuel cell (PEM) is crucial and therefore extensively studied [9].
Deviations of the optimal temperature occur mainly during
two characteristic events: frost/cold start during the start-up
phase and load variations during operation [1]. To reduce
the numbers of frost start/cold start, various techniques are
studied [10], e.g., electrical heaters, increase of oxygen partial
pressure, or metal hydride (MH) based preheaters [11]. The
concept in this paper focus on the stabilization of the operation temperature during load variation.
There exist various cooling techniques for stabilization of
the temperature during operation using air or liquid cooled
systems, e.g., phase change or passive thermal elements [12]. A
common layout for a liquid cooled temperature control is
based on a bypass system with an air cooler in the cooling fluid
circuit [13]. The thermal power of such a cooling system
directly depends on the outside temperature as well as the
surface of the cooler, which is an important factor for the
packaging, e.g., in a vehicle application. In case of a temperature peak reduction in the cooling circuit, this cooler size could
be reduced. So, the question arises, if there exists a system
which could act as small thermal energy buffer providing a
reduction of temperature peaks. Obviously, such kind of
thermal energy buffer needs to fulfill requirements in size,
weight and especially response time such that it could actually
improve the existing simple cooling systems. In the present
manuscript it will be shown that open MH systems are an option for such thermal buffers, as they show fast reaction kinetics and high thermal energy storage capacities.
Furthermore, it is possible to integrate the system into the
existing hydrogen infrastructure and using the gas pressure for
active control, while no hydrogen is actually consumed [14].
The goal of this manuscript is to introduce the concept of such

1503

an active MH temperature controller and demonstrate it's
performance in an experimental setup. The results provide
first insights into the power output that can be achieved, the
response time of the controller and pave the way for future
work.
The operation principle underlying the suggested active
thermal buffer is based on the reversible gas solid reaction of a
MH with hydrogen (H) according to:
1
MHx þ yH2 %MHxþy þ DHR :
2

(1)

The absorption reaction of hydrogen is exothermal and the
desorption reaction endothermal, expressed by the reaction
enthalpy DHR. The variable x and y stands for an arbitrary
integer.
There exist plenty of studies in which MH tanks are
coupled to fuel cells and the required energy balances are
discussed ([15e18]) or the active control of the thermal management is considered ([19,20]). However, the majority of
these studies refer to MHs as gas storage devices. Thus, the
hydrogen discharging rates are rather slow in comparison to
their capacity (e.g. complete discharging in 1  2 h).
The present MH device for active temperature control of
the heat transfer fluid circuit is not considered as gas storage,
but as a device that can provide high thermal powers for
hydrogen based energy systems. In this case, the hydrogen
gas is rather a requirement to release or provide heat and not
to be stored itself.
Fig. 1 shows the intended integration of such an active
thermal buffer as a so called open MH system [14]. As it can be
seen, the module is integrated into the hydrogen supply line of
the fuel cell, thus it can be assumed that at any time hydrogen
can be supplied at a pressure of 8 bar to the system. Furthermore, if required, it can be released to a fuel cell at a few mbar
above ambient pressure. This open metal hydride concept has
already been presented for air-conditioning applications [21]
and it relies on the fact that the energy effort for hydrogen
compression is outside of the considered energy balance. As a
result, the energy available in the compressed hydrogen is
granted for free and in this system no hydrogen is consumed.
The operation principle of the intended temperature control by such a system integrated into an existing hydrogen
infrastructure is also shown schematically in Fig. 1. Whenever
the fuel cell is providing a varying electrical power demand,
the thermal power released as well as the outlet temperature
of the fuel cell vary accordingly (I). In order to compensate this
temperature variation before it re-enters into the fuel cell, the
metal hydride module is integrated into the heat transfer
circuit. The pressure in the metal hydride module (II) can then
be used to trigger the desired reaction and control the temperature in the MH (III): When the fluid temperature is below
the set temperature, the pressure in the metal hydride reactor
needs to be increased. Then, the exothermal reaction will take
place and the temperature of the metal hydride increases. In
case the fuel cell outlet temperature is above the set temperature, the hydrogen pressure will be decreased, resulting in
the endothermal desorption and thus in a lower temperature.
As a result, the outlet temperature of the MH reactor, which
refers to the inlet temperature of the fuel cell, can be kept
constant (IV).

1504

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

Fig. 1 e The figure shows the intended integration of an active thermal buffer (green) as a so called open MH system. The H2
components are colored in bright blue, the fuel cell components in darker blue and the cooling circuit is colored in light
orange. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this
article).

So overall, the envisioned concept is based on the following
two characteristic features of the reaction. First, due to the
reversible exo-/endothermal reaction when hydrogen is provided or removed, it is possible to provide or remove thermal
energy from the system. Thus, at the outlet of the active
thermal buffer element a constant fluid temperature can be
achieved even though the inlet temperature is fluctuating.
Second, the pressure-temperature relationship combined with
the available gas pressure levels enables not only to control the
temperature level at which heat and cold are produced, precisely. Rather, there is the option to release the heat at a much
higher temperature than the cold is provided. Thus, the dynamics of this active thermal buffer for smoothing of fluctuating inlet temperatures can be adjusted as required.
In order to control the set pressure for an active metal
hydride module, a corresponding active MH temperature
controller can be described by a cascaded control structure

shown in Fig. 2. The outer control variable of the cascaded
temperature controller is the outlet temperature Tcf of the
cooling fluid (CF) at the end of the MH-reactor. This temperature is disturbed by a change in the inlet temperature Tcf,in,
e.g., by the load change of the fuel cell. To compensate the
disturbance and maintain a desired temperature, the outer
control loop calculates a desired pressure pset from the error
eT. A pressure controller in the inner control loop controls the
measured hydrogen pressure pg far from the inlet of the MH
reactor by adapting the pressure pR at the inlet of the reactor.
The error ep stands for the difference between the pressure pg
_ cf of the cooling fluid is assumed to
and pset. The mass flow m
be constant in this article. Using the gas pressure as actuating
variable, the temperature of the MH is set imposing two effects on the apparent thermal power. First, the absolute value
of the temperature in the MH affects the reaction rate and
thus the amount of heat that is released or absorbed. Second,

Fig. 2 e Scheme for describing a cascaded active MH temperature controller.

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

the emerging temperature gradient between the MH and the
heat transfer fluid determines the driving force for the heat
transfer. The research questions are: which temperature
gradients can be compensated, at which specific thermal
power and what is the response time of the temperature
signal following the gas pressure?
In order to demonstrate the proof of concept, a reactor
designed for high thermal powers is required. In the present
study, an existing reactor reported in Ref. [22] for preheating of
fuel cells has been used. The reactor is filled with 960 g of the
MH LaNi4.85Al0.15, which corresponds to an estimated thermal
energy of 192 kJ for a full absorption reaction and 209 kJ for a full
desorption reaction. The material is suitable for the study, as
its equilibrium pressure at 70  C and 50% hydrogen loading is
5.7 bar. Assuming that in a fuel cell infrastructure hydrogen is
available at 8 bar while it is required in the fuel cell at few mbar
above ambient pressure, the MH can achieve temperatures
between 20  C and 75  C with a hydrogen loading of 90%. Details
on the material properties especially the conversion dependence of the equilibrium conditions can be found in Ref. [23].

2.
Experimental testbench and model
description
2.1.

Experimental set-up

To demonstrate the performance of the temperature
controller, an existing test bench with a MH reactor was

1505

adapted for identification and control of the reactor from
Ref. [24]. The setup of the test bench can be found in Fig. 3.
It consists of the cooling fluid circuit in black and the
hydrogen gas part in blue. The cooling fluid flows from the
thermostatic bath through the pump, the needle valve NV1
and through the reactor back to the bath. Thus, in this setup,
the thermostatic bath represents the fuel cell in a later
application, which can provide varying outlet temperatures at
various electrical loads. The two thermocouples (index small
c,Tc) measure the cooling fluid temperature at the inlet Tcf,in
and the outlet Tcf of the reactor. NV1 regulates the cooling fluid
mass flow. The regulated mass flow of the cooling fluid is
_ H2O .
measured by a Coriolis mass flow meter M
The MH reactor connects the cooling fluid circuit with the
hydrogen circuit. The reactor is based on a shell-and-tube
heat exchanger and was designed and build in Ref. [24]. It
has one inlet and one outlet for the cooling fluid (black) and
two ports on the hydrogen side (blue). At one hydrogen port,
the pressure sensor P4 with the measured pressure pr is
attached. The other port serves as in- and outlet for the
hydrogen to the reactor. Therefore, the port is connected with
the blue hydrogen circuit.
The hydrogen for the experiments is provided from a
hydrogen reservoir and is buffered in the Sieverts volume for
precise balancing. To allow the balancing, the pressure sensor
P1 measures the pressure psiev and the thermocouple Tc,siev the
temperature Tsiev in the Sieverts volume. The Sieverts volume
is connected to the inlet and outlet of the reactor by the
pressure regulator PR1. Further the inlet and outlet of the

Fig. 3 e Illustration of the test bench setup with the cooling fluid circuit in black and the hydrogen part in blue. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article).

1506

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

reactor is connected with the pressure regulator and flow
meter PR2. PR2 controls the pressure for an outflow of
hydrogen from the reactor to the surrounding. The outflowing
_ H2 . The
mass flow is measured by the mass flow meter M
maximum measurable flow of the sensor is limited to 5 Nl/
min. Therefore, a bypass valve PVout for higher not measured
outflows is included. The pressure sensor P3 measures the
pressure in the pipes pp. Table A.3 of the appendix gives an
overview on the measurement equipment.
Using the measured values for temperature, pressure and
mass flows the heat flow from the MH to the cooling fluid, the
mean temperature and the hydrogen charging are calculated.
The hydrogen charging u is calculated differently for the two
types of reactions. This is due to the different measurement
methods during absorption and desorption.
During absorption, u is calculated by integrating the
changes in the amount of hydrogen in the Sieverts volume
between time steps. During desorption the hydrogen flow can
be measured with PR2 for hydrogen flow rates below 5 Nl/min
and recalculated with the ideal gas law to a hydrogen
charging. For higher volume flows, the hydrogen charging is
estimated through the pressure. Therefore, the hydrogen
charging value at the beginning and the end of the reaction is
determined and a relation between pressure and the
hydrogen charging is adopted. The exact calculation of the
hydrogen charging during absorption and desorption can be
comprehended in the Chapter Appendix B.
Finally, the heat flow between the MH and the cooling fluid
from measurement (meas) data can be calculated as
_ cf ðTcf  Tcf;in Þ  Q_ loss ;
Q_ cf;meas ¼ cp;cf m

(2)

with the heat loss to ambience Q_ loss , the specific heat capacity
of the cooling fluid cp,cf and the mass flow of the cooling fluid
_ cf;meas . The heat loss refers to a constant value for the
m
considered temperature range Tcf;in ¼ ½60; 70; 80  C. It is
determined during steady state at Tcf,in ¼ 70  C with an inactive
reactor ðQ_ cf;meas ¼ 0Þ. The heat loss has to be considered in the
experimental data, as the model of the reactor will be discussed without the influence of the ambient.

2.2.

Model description

For the mathematical modeling approach, the reactor
described in the previous section is simplified as a lumped 0Dmodel with only one tube. Further, the reactor is divided into
three different balance areas: hydrogen gas (light blue), cooling fluid (dark blue) and the hollow cylinder of the MH (purple). The lumped 0D-model is considered without influence of
the ambient. The balance areas and the physical quantities for
setting up the model equations are shown in Fig. 4.
The balance for the cooling fluid area is derived from the
energy balance described with the density of the cooling fluid
rcf, the volume of the cooling fluid inside the reactor Vcf and
the time derivative of the temperature Tcf as
rcf cp;cf Vcf

vTcf
¼ Q_ in  Q_ out  Q_ MH;cf :
vt

(3)

The inlet heat flow Q_ in with the inlet temperature Tcf,in
_ cf Tcf;in
Q_ in ¼ cp;cf m

(4)

and the outlet heat flow Q_ out with the outlet temperature Tcf
_ cf Tcf
Q_ out ¼ cp;cf m

(5)

_ cf and the constant
are calculated with the mass flow rate m
heat capacity of the cooling fluid cp,cf. Further, the heat flow
Q_ MH;cf from the metal hydride to the cooling fluid is calculated
by
Q_ MH;cf ¼ kADTMH;cf ;

(6)

with the heat transfer coefficient k, the heat transfer surface A
and the driving temperature difference DTMH,cf.The driving
temperature difference is calculated using the assumption of
a logarithmic temperature difference, as the representative
fluid temperature is changing during the reaction [25].
DTMH;cf ¼

TMH  Tcf  ðTMH  Tcf;in Þ


;
 MH T 
cf 
ln TTMH
Tcf;in 

with the temperature of the MH TMH.

Fig. 4 e Illustration of the reactor with the defined balance areas. Based on [24].

(7)

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

1507

flow Q_ MH;cf and the reaction enthalpy flow n_ g DHR are consid-

With the derived Eq. (9) for the dynamic of the hydrogen
charging u, the molar flow rate n_ g can be described by

ered (see Fig. 4). The reaction enthalpy flow consists of the
consumed amount of hydrogen n_ g and the reaction enthalpy

n_ g ¼

DHR. With those heat flows the equation for the respective
balance area can be described by the time derivative of the
temperature in the MH TMH, the mass of the MH mMH and the
specific heat capacity cv,MH

For describing the pressure of the hydrogen gas pg in Eq. (9),
a mass balance considering the mass flow rate into the reactor
_ p and the reaction hydrogen molar flow rate n_ g (replaced by
m

For setting up the MH balance as energy balance, the heat

mMH cv;MH

vTMH
¼ Q_ MH;cf þ n_ g DHR :
vt

(8)

To describe the dynamic of the MH reaction by a pressure
or temperature change, a kinetic equation has to be introduced. A simple approach for gas-solid-reactions as in
Ref. [23] is
!
Ea
pg  peq
vu
RTMH
¼ K0 e
f ðuÞ
vt |ﬄﬄﬄ {zﬄﬄﬄ }
peq
f ðTÞ |ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}

(9)

f ðpÞ

where vu/vt describes the hydrogen charging rate through a
temperature, pressure and charging dependent part. The
temperature dependent part f(T) is based on an Arrhenius
approach with the activation energy Ea, the ideal gas constant R, the temperature of the MH bed TMH and the preexponential factor K0. In this case, the pre-exponential
factor represents the Arrhenius factor KAr of the material
kinetics and as well unmodeled influences, namely heat
and mass transfer effects in the lumped system. The
pressure dependent part f(p) describes the normalized
driving force by the pressure difference in the MH bed pg
and the equilibrium pressure peq. This difference is
normalized with the equilibrium pressure according to
Ref. [26]. The reaction mechanism f(u) to describe the influence of the hydrogen charging, distinguishes between
absorption and desorption as

f ðuÞ ¼

umax  u
u

absorption
desorption:

(10)

In the following section a description for the parameters n_ g ,
pg and peq is derived.

vu mMH
:
vt 100MH2

(11)

(11)) is set up. With the assumptions of ideal gas behaviour,
constant volume of the radial gas gap Vg and constant
ambient temperature Tamb of the hydrogen gas, the pressure
in the balance area can be described as


vpg
R Tamb
vu mMH
_p
¼
:
m
vt 100MH2
vt
MMH2 Vg

(12)

_ p into the reactor and the void volume
The mass flow rate m
of the tubes is approximated with a polytropic and reversible
adiabatic outflow equation of an ideal gas at Tamb, as it is
assumed that this temperature is representative for the
incoming gas. The derivation can be found in Appendix C.
For MH (based) reactions, temperature, pressure and
charging state are closely correlated, thus a mathematical
description of this relationship is required as baseline for the
mathematical model. Using enthalpy and entropy data from
Ref. [24], for the present material, the following description
has been deduced
8
> DHabs ðuÞ DSabs ðuÞ
þ lnðIadd ðuÞÞ
þ
>
  >
< RT
R
peq
MH
¼
ln
>
p0
DHdes ðuÞ DSdes ðuÞ
>
>
:
þ
RTMH
R

Absorption
Desorption
(13)

which distinguishes between absorption (abs) and desorption
(des) with an additional proportion Iadd(u) for the steep increases of the MH plateaus. In the equation, TMH represents
the temperature of the MH, p0 the standardized pressure of
1 bar, R the ideal gas constant, DHR and DSR the reaction
enthalpy and entropy. Eq. (13) is valid for 0 < u < umax and
p0 > 0. For more details refer to Appendix D.
Table 1 lists all parameters of the balance equations.

Table 1 e Overview of the symbols, values and references for the model parameters and constants. When there is no
reference given, the value is measured or a general known constant.
Parameter
Parameters MH
MH mass
Specific heat capacity MH
Parameters cooling fluid water
Specific heat capacity water
Density water
Parameters reactor
Cross sectional area of hydrogen inlet
Volume hydrogen reactor
Volume cooling Fluid in reactor
Constants
Ideal gas constant
Molare mass hydrogen

Symbol

Value

Reference

mMH
cV,MH

0.96 kg
419 J kg1 K1

[24]
[27]

cp,cf
rcf

4189, 6 J kg1 K1 at 70  C
977, 76 kg/m3 at 70  C

[28]
[28]

Ag
Vg
Vcf

25 mm2
191 cm3
1.4523  104m3

[24]

R
MH2

8, 314 Jmol1K1
2, 016 gmol1

1508

3.

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

Results and discussion

In the following subsection, the parameters of the model Eqs.
(3), (8) and (9) are identified and the model is validated with
experimental data. The main focus in the identification is on
the dynamic between the hydrogen pressure and the MH
hydrogen loading values. In the subsequent section, the
model with the identified parameters will be used for the
design of the controller.

3.1.

Problem set-up of the parameter identification

In the first part of this section, the parameter vector Q
Q ¼ ½Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q5 

¼ ½kA Ea

K0

kpeq

umax ;

(14)

which is to be identified will be explained using the model
equations.
The first parameter for identification corresponds to the
heat flow from the cooling fluid to the MH. In Eq. (6) the
temperature gradient, the surface A and the heat transfer
coefficient k describe this one dimensional simplified heat
flow from the cooling fluid to the MH. For the present reactor
design an analytical estimation of A and k would be imprecise
due to missing parameters such as contact resistance or local
power density. That is why the product of k , A is identified as
lumped parameter from experimental data.
Regarding the reaction rate in Eq. (9), the activation Energy
Ea and the lumped parameter K0 are identified as well.
Thereby, Ea represents the physical property of the energy
barrier, which is necessary to start the reaction. K0 presents
the conventional Arrhenius factor and includes unmodeled
effects of the 0D model in mass and heat transfer.
The next two parameters for the identification are model
correction parameters as the 0D model of the present reactor
is simplified. The model depends on material properties,
which are functions of pressure and temperature of the MH. In
this work, it is assumed that the inlet temperature Tcf,in corresponds to an overall average of the MH temperature in the
reactor. This assumption leads to errors in the corresponding
calculated material properties, as the actual temperature of
the MH will be actually lower than the assumed temperature.
As a result also the actual equilibrium pressure will be lower
than the calculated one. This effect could be seen in simplified
pressure concentration isotherm (PCI) measurements during
absorption. In order to correct this effect in the model, the
fitting parameter kpeq is introduced during absorption
reactions.
In the evaluation of the measurement data, it can be
observed that the maximum hydrogen charging state umax is
smaller than expected from literature data of [24]. To incorporate the observed lower maximum values, the parameter
umax is identified.
Next to the model parameters, the excitation signals have
to be chosen for the parameter identification. The reaction of
MHs with hydrogen generally represents a stable system with
an equilibrium between gas pressure, temperature and
hydrogen charging. This equilibrium of MH can be changed by

forcing a temperature or pressure change from outside, which
will lead to a (partial) reaction and thus to a defined fraction of
the absorption or desorption reaction enthalpy. Since in the
present system gas transport is much faster than heat transfer, the pressure pg is chosen as excitation signal.
In the next step, the type of excitation signal needs to be
determined. To keep the identification simple, pressure step
functions with different starting and final values, which are
based on fixed hydrogen loading values, are used in the present study. Further, for a temperature control it is important
to know how much cold or heat can still be released by the
MH, why the hydrogen loading state and not the heat flow is
used for identification.
As a consequence, for the experimental design of the
measurements the following procedure has been defined. The
baseline experiments take place at 60  C and 80  C. Experiments at 70  C are used for validation. For each temperature
four different pressure levels for absorption and desorption
reaction are chosen. An overview over the resulting pressure
profile is given in Fig. 5, where the absorption reaction with
the pressure steps leading to changes in the hydrogen loading
from 0% to 10%, 10%e50%, 50%e90%. The start and endpoint
pressures of the step functions are determined from the
measured data from Ref. [24]. The hydrogen loading value of
0% was set at a pressure of 1 bar. The step from 0% to 100% is
called “full step”. The expression “partial step” is used for all
other changes in the hydrogen loading, e.g., 10%e50%.

3.2.

Parameter identification

As mentioned before, the control objective for the current
system is the stabilization of the reactor output temperature
from the heat transfer fluid to a given set point. Therefore, a
cost functional for the following parameter identification of
the reactor model is defined. The cost functional takes two
aspects into account: The hydrogen charging state u and the
thermal energy transferred from/to the heat transfer fluid
Q_ MH;cf . The transferred heat directly influences the outlet
temperature of the reactor. The hydrogen charging state has a

Fig. 5 e Exemplary representation of the pressure steps in
a row for the temperature 80  C. The aimed hydrogen
loading of a pressure jump is written at the end of each
pressure step.

1509

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

strong influence on the dynamics of the system and additionally determines the amount of hydrogen that can be
absorbed or desorbed starting from the current state. Moreover, reaction entropy and the kinetics are also dependent on
the actual hydrogen charging. For the optimization problem
including all mentioned equations the following state vector
x ¼ Tcf

u

TMH

(15)

and input vector is defined as
h
u ¼ pg

i
Tcf;in :

(16)

With those vectors the least square formulation of the cost
functional is set up as the following optimization problem
min
Q

tN
X

ðQ_ cf;sim ðtk Þ  Q_ cf;meas ðtk ÞÞ
ðusim ðtk Þ  umeas ðtk ÞÞ2
þ 0:6
unorm
Q_ norm

for x_ 3 , (7) for DTMH,cf, (13) for peq, (10) for f(u) and the calculation
of the heat stream from measurement data in Eq. (2). A
distinction of cases is performed for the equilibrium pressure,
the reaction enthalpy and the term f(x2). Further, the calculation of the equilibrium pressure of the MH in Eq. (13) is
supplemented by the identification parameter Q4.
The optimization problem with the given input and state
vector is solved with the pattern search algorithm PATTERNSEARCH in MATLAB/SIMULINK, while the model is simulated with
the solver ODE23S.
The optimal result for the parameter vector Q is given by
h
Q* ¼ kA*

E*a

K*0

*

kpeq

u*max

i
(18)

¼ ½735:5 36000 12016 48448 1:175

2

0:4

tk ¼0

s:t:
0  x2  Q5
xð0Þ ¼ ½x1;0 ; x2;0 ; x3;0 
1
_ cf cp;cf ðu2  x1 Þ
 Q1 DTMH;cf þ m
rcf cp;cf ; Vcf
!
Q2
u1  peq
x_ 2 ¼ Q3 e Rx3
f ðx2 Þ
peq


1
mMH
x_ 3 ¼
Q1 DTMH;cf þ x_ 2 DHR
mMH cV;MH
100MH2
x_ 1 ¼

DTMH;cf ¼

x3  x1  ðx3  u2 Þ


x3  x1 

ln 
x u 
3

2

absorption
DHabs ðx2 Þ DSabs ðx2 Þ
þ
RT
R

peq ¼ p0 e

þ Iadd  Q4

DHR ¼ DHabs
f ðx2 Þ ¼ ðQ5  x2 Þ
desorption
DHdes ðx2 Þ DSdes ðx2 Þ
þ
RT
R

peq ¼ p0 e

DHR ¼ DHdes
f ðx2 Þ ¼ x2
in between
f ðx2 Þ ¼ 0:
(17)
The cost functional in the optimization problem evaluates
the difference between the measurement data (umeas, Q_ cf;meas )
and the simulation data (usim, Q_ cf;sim ) at the discrete time
points tk. To avoid weighting due to different magnitudes the
heat flow and the hydrogen charging are normalized accordingly by unorm and Q_ norm . Both values represent the maximum
value during the first step of the optimization. The error in the
heat flow is weighted higher in the cost functional as the error
in the hydrogen charging. The weighting is a result of
parameter studies with selected different weights. The cost
functional is restricted by the model Eq. (3) for x_ 1 , (9) for x_ 2 , (8)

using the measurement data for 60  C and 80  C. This
temperatures are chosen for identification due to the
assumption that most of the fuel cells will run between this
temperatures. Comparing the result to the literature, the
optimal parameter values are in physically meaningful ranges
e.g., umax can be estimated from Ref. [24] with approximately
1.3 wt% or Ea with approximately 36 202 J/mol. The optimization achieves a coefficient of determination R2 of 0.88 for u
_
and 0.81 for Q.

3.3.

Model validation

As the model parameters have been identified using the
measurement data at 60  C and 80  C, for validation, the
simulation results of the identified model parameters at 70  C
are compared to the measurement data. In Fig. 6, a comparison of the reaction rates is presented. The model represents
the same trends like an increase in reaction rate with a lower
initial charging state as can be seen in the measurement
values. Furthermore, the general shape of the curves can be
compared between measurement and simulation. However,
overall the simulations are delayed and have a damped
amplitude compared to the measurements.
This deviation in the modeling of the reaction rate
consequently also causes deviations in the determined
charging state. In Fig. 7, from the start up to minute 92,
three partial step absorption reactions take place which
can be observed from the measured as well as from the
simulated data. During those reaction periods, a mean
error between the measurement and simulation data of
10.4% occurs. As mentioned before, this error is mainly due
to the deviations in the reaction rate. Further, the
measured pressure pr is used for the simulation. The
pressure sensor P4, which measures this pressure pr, is
positioned far from the hydrogen inlet in the reactor.
That's why the measured pressure pr changes more slowly
than the mean reactor pressure, resulting in a reaction
delay in the beginning.
Starting from 92 min, three desorption reactions are
visible. In comparison to the absorption reactions, a similar
error of 11.4% can be observed. The differences are mainly due
to the necessary estimation (limited outflow of PR2) of the
hydrogen conversion rate during desorption and a lack for PCI
data in the examined temperature range.

1510

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

validated model will be used to develop a PI controller that is
validated by additional experiments.

3.4.1.

Fig. 6 e Comparison between simulation and experimental
data of the reaction rate for different partial pressure steps.
In comparison to the reaction rates, the heat flow determined for measurement and simulation fits quite well. The
mean error during the partial step absorption in Fig. 7 is about
3.9% and the mean error during the full step desorption 9.2%.
The peaks in the error at the beginning of the reactions are
again due to a slower start of the reaction in simulation. A
delayed change of the hydrogen charging corresponds to a
delayed start of the reaction (due to the pressure assumption)
and thus to a delayed heat flux.
In conclusion, the model captures the general underlying
trends that are required for the development of the control
strategy in the next section. However, there is still a difference
between the maximum hydrogen state umax and the identified
one. In order to further improve the model quality regarding
hydrogen charging rate and charging state, improved data for
PCI would be required as well as more representative measurements probes for lumped temperature and pressure
values inside the reactor.

3.4.

Temperature control

The main goal of the present publication is the demonstration
of a control strategy for a metal hydride reactor in order to
develop an active thermal buffer module. In this section, the

Controller design

The introduced cascaded control structure in Fig. 2 has the goal
to stabilize the output temperature of the reactor due to temperature fluctuations of the cooling fluid and constant mass
stream through the reactor. To achieve this goal, reaction
enthalpy of the metal hydride must be released or removed
from the fluid depending on the required heat source or heat
sink to compensate the fluctuating inlet temperature signal,
respectively. Obviously, the amount of enthalpy released or
provided can be determined by comparison of the hydrogen
charging state at the start and end of the corresponding fluctuating signal. To measure and define these changes of the
hydrogen charging state during a reaction, volume flow sensors
and pressure sensors combined with material data would be a
simple solution. However, for application purpose the measurement of the volume flow of hydrogen is not practicable.
Instead, more simple pressure sensors P2, P3 and P4 are used in
the present test bench and the hydrogen charging is approximated over the pressure. The second inner control loop controls the pressure in the test bench. It consist of the chosen
input variable pset and pg as control variable. The cascaded
control structure has the advantages of achieving higher accuracy of the much faster varying pressure in the inner loop.
That helps to reduce errors in the outlet temperature faster.
As in the test bench two pressure regulators are installed,
the typically cascaded control structure from Fig. 2 is
extended to the structure in Fig. 8. The location of the pressure
regulators PR1 and PR2 can be seen in Fig. 3. The regulator PR1
is integrated between the Sieverts volume and the reactor, the
second regulator PR2 is integrated between the reactor and the
outlet to the surrounding. The parameters of the inlet regulator had to be identified, as they have not been provided by
the device itself. As an approach a PI controller is used and the
parameters of the controller are identified with pressure steps
from 1 bar to 6 bar and 8 bar or 10 bar. The parameters of the
outlet pressure regulator are determined from the programmable logic controller (PLC) software and the parameter sets
for both pressure regulators are shown in Table 2. Depending
on the difference between the given pressure pset and the
pressure inside the reactor pg the PLC at the test bench
switches between those two regulators.
Now the controller for the outer control loop for inlet
temperature stabilization is designed. Therefore, the pressure
pg is added to the state vector (15) with the state Eq. (12) and
the new input pressure pR is added in the input vector (16).
Thus, the new state vector can be introduced.
h
x* ¼ Tcf

u TMH

pg

i

(19)

and input vector
u* ¼ pR

Tcf ; in :

(20)

As controller a PI control structure is implemented in
MATLAB/SIMULINK embedded in the simulation of the whole
control structure in Fig. 8. With the simulation model, the
parameters Kp and KI of the outer PI controller are tuned by the
minimization of the cost functional

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

1511

Fig. 7 e Validation of different small pressure steps in the simulation with measurement data at 70  C. (a) H2 charging for
partial step response. (b) Heat flow for partial step response. (c) Relative error between the simulation and measurement
data for the hydrogen charging. (d) Relative error between the simulation and measurement data for the heat flow.

Fig. 8 e Extended control structure for describing an active MH temperature controller.

minKP ;KI

tN
X
tk ¼0

0:4

tN1
X
x_ 1 ðtk Þ
ðx1 ðtk Þ  Tset;out ðtk ÞÞ2
þ 0:6
e
equad;norm
t ¼0 diff;norm
k

s:t:
*

x ð0Þ ¼ ½x*1;0 ; x*2;0 ; x*3;0 ; x*4;0 
*
x_ ¼ f ðx* ; u* ; KP ; KI Þ:

(21)

The cost functional is inspired by Ref. [29] and consists of
two weighted terms. The first term corresponds to the
quadratic error of the difference between the desired set
temperature Tset,out and the temperature Tcf at the outlet of
the reactor. The term is normalized with the difference of
those two variables equad, norm at the initial solution of the
optimization. The quadratic error term of the temperature

1512

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

Table 2 e Parameters of the inlet and outlet pressure
controller.
Parameter

PR1

PR2

Kp
Ti
Td
T1
Sampling time

0.27
0.3
e
e
0.1

10
4
1
0.2
0.1

leads to less deflection and a fast transient response of the
control variable Tcf. The second term in the cost functional
includes the time derivative of the quadratic error Tcf, which
leads to a more damped behaviour. The term is normalized
with ediff, norm, representing the maximum value of x_ 1 at the
initial solution of the optimization. Both terms are evaluated
at the discrete time steps tk. The weighting factors are a result
of a parameter study, where the weighting factors with the
lowest deviation between the desired set temperature Tset,out
and the temperature Tcf at the outlet of the reactor have been
selected. As constraints the model equations f(x*, u*, KP, KI) are
describing the reactor model with Eqs. ((3), (7)e(10), (12), (13),
the PI-controller equations from PR1, PR2 and the gray colored
switching element in Fig. 8. Using the cost functional introduced before, a disturbance is necessary to calculate a set of
parameters.
The disturbance in the inlet temperature is adapted to the
boundary conditions of the MH during absorption (maximum
hydrogen charging, maximum heat flow) and the boundary
conditions of the test bench (maximum measurable outflow).
During desorption only a small temperature variance can be
handled because of the limited hydrogen outflow of the
pressure controller at the outlet. Thus, a trapezoidal signal,
shown in Fig. 9(a), with a temperature decrease of 2.5 K for
absorption and a temperature increase of 1 K for desorption is
applied as a disturbance. A hold time of 30 s is provided when
the target temperature is reached. Note, that the trapezoidal
signal has the same time length for the temperature increase
and decrease, what leads to different amounts of released
thermal energy between desorption and absorption.
As a result the control parameters KP ¼ 4.11 and KI ¼ 1, 55
are determined for a sampling time of the temperature
controller of 0.5 s. Using these parameters on the test bench,
another experiment for the controller validation has been
performed where the identical disturbance has been applied
as in the simulations for the design of the controller.

3.4.2.

Validation of the controller

Fig. 9 shows the results of the comparison between simulation
(dark blue) and experimental results (light blue). The cooling
fluid inlet temperature Tcf (yellow) shows the disturbance that
has been imposed on the system around the set point temperature of 70  C (black). This signal can be used to split the
following discussion in two phases. First of all, from t z 2 min
to t ¼ 10 min, there is the negative disturbance in Tcf, which in
turn requires the exothermal absorption process to stabilize
the temperature. Second, from t ¼ 10 min to the end of the
experiment, a positive disturbance signal is applied to the

system which triggers the endothermal desorption reaction.
For both time frames, it can be observed that the simulated
temperature signal (light blue) as well as the measured cooling
fluid temperature (dark blue) shows a temperature stabilization with minor oscillations around the set point of 70  C.
Thus, the implemented controller and the metal hydride
reactor are able to proof the basic concept of the active thermal buffer.
The oscillations in simulation and experimental temperature profiles can be traced back to the two pressure controllers
with their different dynamical behavior. Further, the oscillations during the absorption reactions are larger due to the
larger inlet temperature disturbance and because of the
higher possible dynamics of the mainly active pressure regulator PR1. Due to inaccuracies in the modeling and the model
based parameter tuning of the controller, the temperature
controller is acting too aggressively in the measurement in
comparison to the simulation.
Fig. 9(b) shows the pressure setpoint for the temperature
controller in the simulation and the measurement. First of all,
in this diagram, the oscillations in the measurement especially during the absorption phase have a large amplitude. The
reason for these oscillations are the differences in the
modeled and experimental reaction rate, leading to underestimated reaction rates from the temperature controller
perspective. Due to these point, the designed parameters of
the temperature controller are acting too aggressive in the
experiments (see before). However, in the following the general trends in the set pressure will be discussed neglecting the
oscillating behaviour.
During absorption phase, the setpoint of the pressure
varies, although the set temperature is constantly at 70  C.
This indicates two important characteristics of the MH hydrogen reaction system. First, while the inlet temperature
continues to decrease to its minimum (until t ¼ 5 min), the
pressure increases. This increase in set pressure leads to a
higher equilibrium temperature inside of the material and
consequently to higher temperature gradient between the
material and the cooling fluid. Thus, the heat transfer can
be increased by this set pressure in order to stabilize the
temperature to 70  C despite the fluctuating inlet temperature. As mentioned in the introduction, this behaviour is
quite special for thermal energy storages and can only be
realized with thermochemical thermal energy storages as
they show this pressure/temperature relation, which enables the design of such an active thermal energy buffer.
Second, it can be observed that although the disturbance
signal is symmetric, the set pressure at e.g. 3 and 8 min
shows different values for the identical thermal power that
needs to be transferred to stabilize the temperature. This
behaviour is due to the fact that the pressure-temperature
relationship is also a function of hydrogen charging and
the hydrogen charging also varies during the process, which
can be seen in Fig. 9(c).
Overall, it can be stated that the model is capturing the
crucial dynamics of the MH reactor in a sufficient way that the
resulting controller is able to realize the desired temperature
stabilization. The strong oscillations that can be observed

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

1513

Fig. 9 e Results of the simulation and experiment with the proposed control structure. (a) Temperature of the cooling fluid at
the inlet and outlet of the reactor during simulation and measurement. (b) Pressure pset from the simulation and the
measurement data. (c) Hydrogen charging of the control loop simulation and experiment.

especially during the absorption phase, are due to non-modeled
effects in the reaction rate and the pressure regulators.
Finally, Fig. 9(c) shows the hydrogen charging for simulation and experiment. During the first half of the absorption
phase the measurement and simulation data agree well. Then,
from t ¼ 8 min to t ¼ 10 min, the two curves start to deviate. For
the subsequent desorption phase, this deviation increases.
The reason for this lies in differences between the approximated material data to the real behaviour of the metal hydride.
Concluding this experimental validation, it can be summarized that despite the deviations between model and

experiment, especially regarding the reaction rate, the model
was able to capture the crucial features of the MH behaviour.
Thus, it was possible to design a controller which was able to
realize an experimental proof of concept for the active thermal buffer module based on MHs.

3.5.
General discussion of the active thermal buffer
module
In order to realize an active thermal buffer element, next to
the demonstration of the stabilization of the temperature, it is

1514

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

4.

Fig. 10 e Time sequence to compare the pressure pg in the
reactor and the temperature Tcf at the outlet of the reactor.
of special interest to evaluate the achieved response time.
Thus, to demonstrate how fast a variation in the set pressure
results in a response in the outlet temperature of the fluid.
Therefore, the time sequences of the measured pressure pg
and temperature Tcf are shown in Fig. 10 in detail for an
arbitrarily selected time period. It is obvious that a variation in
pressure leads to an temperature change within a maximum
delay of 5 s, which is fast for a thermal energy storage system.
Concluding, the experiments have proven that the dynamic of
the MH even inside the reactor are very fast and thus, the gas
pressure is a suitable control variable for the design of an
active thermal buffer based on MHs.
Next to the generic response time of the system, it is also
important to determine the achieved thermal peak power as
well as the achieved amount of thermal energy that has been
provided by the system. In the present case, the thermal peak
power can be calculated to 724.8 W for absorption and 134.8 W
for desorption or 755 W/kgMH and 140 W/kgMH, respectively. It
has to be considered, that the desorption peak power was
limited by the framework of the test bench. Looking at the
thermal energy calculated with (2) evaluated at every discrete
time point and summed up, the reactor could compensate the
thermal disturbance with 146.96 kJ during absorption and
31.62 kJ during desorption. Due to the smaller temperature
amplitude and the same time length as in the absorption
disturbance, the released thermal energy during desorption is
lesser.
When designing such an active thermal buffer, the sizing
of the module can be a limitation for its wide applicability. As
the system is based on thermal capacity, the compensation of
e.g., increased thermal loads when going uphill is rather not
realistic as it would require very high masses. In this case, the
additional weight of an increased heat exchanger removing
the occurring thermal energy immediately, will be more useful. However, due to the possible response times and the
achieved thermal power, the system can be included as small
module to compensate for temperature peaks in the range of
seconds, which would in turn afford high efforts in control of
the tardy overall heat transfer fluid circuit.

Conclusion

In the present study, an experimental setup has been
realized to demonstrate the temperature control in a heat
transfer fluid circuit using an active thermal buffer reactor
based on MHs, which requires neither hydrogen nor
electricity. For this, a simple PI controller was designed
based on validated 0D-model simulations. Using the gas
pressure as actuating variable, the PI controller was able
to transfer fluctuating inlet temperatures with 3.9 K and
þ1.2 K to a constant outlet temperature. A temperature
disturbance with the thermal energy of ~147 kJ and
~32 kJ has been compensated at thermal powers of þ755
W/kgMH and 140 W/kgMH for absorption and desorption,
respectively.
The features of such a system are:
 Active control of the outlet temperature for fluctuating
inlet temperatures by actuation of the gas pressure.
 High peak powers 755 W/kgMH for heating are measured.
Due to reaction enthalpies of more or less same size during
absorption and desorption, similiar peaks for cooling can
be expected.
 Response times below 5 s of the system following the gas
pressure due to immediate reaction and good heat transfer
properties
Future work will focus on an improved model quality by
improved design of the measurement concept and on a
advanced controller, e.g., with a feed forward part. For application, the achieved specific thermal power will assist in
designing and sizing suitable systems and thereby it will help
to evaluate the possibility of a cooler size reduction in an
existing fuel cell cooling system.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgements
Partly funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG e
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Project-ID 279064222) as
part of the Collaborative Research Centre 1244 (SFB 1244)
Adaptive Skins and Structures for the Built Environment of
Tomorrow, project A05.

Appendix A. Measurement equipment overview
An overview of the used measurement equipment is given in
Table A.3.

1515

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

Table A.3 e Overview of the measurement equipment at the test bench.
parameter

sensor name

manufacturer's designation

range

deviation

temperature T

Tc,siev
Tc,cf & Tc,cf,in calibrated to each other
P1
P2
P3
P4
_ H2O
M

type K, class 1
type K, class 1
Keller PA-21-y
integrated in PR1 (Brooks SLA5810)
Keller PA-21-y
Keller PA-21-y
Promass 83F

40 … 1000
10 … 95  C
1 … 160 bar
0.120 bar
1 … 30 bar
1 … 60 bar
0 … 2000 kgh1

±1.5 K
±0.05 K
±0.8 bar
e
±0.15 bar
±0.3 bar
±0.1%

_ H2
M

Bronkhorst Fe201CVe5F6 PGD-33-Y

0 … 5 LNmin1

pressure p

_
mass flow m

Appendix B. Calculation of the hydrogen
charging value

Appendix C. Calculation of the hydrogen mass
stream into and out of the reactor

In the following, the calculation of the hydrogen charging
value is described in more detail.
During absorption u is calculated with the help of the
Sieverts volume with the defined volume Vsiev ¼ 2.25 l and the
measured values Tsiev and psiev. With those parameters and
the approach

As an approach the polytropic and reversible adiabatic
outflow equation of an ideal gas
sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2pg
_ p ¼ Ag j
(C.1)
m
RTamb

nsiev ðtÞ ¼

pSiev ðtÞVSiev
;
RTSiev ðTÞZðpSiev ðtÞ; TSiev ðtÞÞ

(B.1)

with the fugacity coefficient Z and the real gas coefficient R,
the actual amount of hydrogen in the volume nsiev can be
calculated. The value of the coefficient Z is calculated according to the approach in Ref. [30]. With the amount of
hydrogen in the Sieverts volume nsiev, the amount of hydrogen
in the void volume ntot, the absorbed amount of hydrogen nabs
can be calculated as
nabs ðtÞ ¼ nsiev ðt0 Þ  nsiev ðtÞ  ntot ðtÞ:

(B.2)

Furthermore, the hydrogen charging state is calculated
with
u¼

nH2
,100%;
MH2 mMH

(B.3)

where nH2 represents the amount of hydrogen, MH2 the
molar mass of hydrogen and mMH the mass of MH in the
reactor.
During desorption the hydrogen charging can be
measured with PR2 for hydrogen flow rates below 5 Nl/min
and recalculated with the ideal gas law to a hydrogen loading
rate. For higher volume flow rates the hydrogen charging is
estimated by the relation between pressure and the
hydrogen charging as
uðtÞ  uðt  1Þ pðtÞ  pðt  1Þ
¼
;
Duges
Dpges

_ p into the reactor in Eq. (12) is not known.
The mass flow rate m

is set up with the outflow function j approximated as
!!
pp
1
:
(C.2)
jzjfit ¼ 0:4854 tanh 5:2
pg
In the equations, Ag represents the surface of the oulet
cross section of the reactor, pg the gas pressure in the reactor,
pp the gas pressure in the pipes. The detailed procedure of the
derivation can be found in Ref. [31].

Appendix D. Calculation of the equilibrium
pressure in the 0D - Model
In the following section, the calculation of the equilibrium
pressure in Chapter 2.2 is discussed more in detail. Starting
with the calculation of the required reaction enthalpies
DHR,abs, DHR,des and the entropies DSabs, DSdes. Those are based
on the evaluation of the PCI data in Ref. [24] for the hydrogen
loadings of urel ¼ ½10 %; 50 %; 90 %. To calculate the enthalpy
and entropy values for arbitary loadings, linear regression
DX ¼ 41 urel þ 42

(D.1)

is used. Here, DX is a placeholder for the enthalpy and entropy values, 41 and 42 determine the coefficients, and urel is the
present charging state. The values of the coefficients are listed
in Table D.4.

(B.4)

where Duges and Dpges represent the changes between the
initial and end values during a desorption reaction. Hence, an
equality of the dynamics in the loading and pressure is
assumed. The initial values for the calculation are taken from
the previous reaction. The final charging is approximated via
the approximated PCI's.

Table D.4 e Coefficients of the linear regression in Eq. D.1
for the reaction enthalpy and entropie values.
DHR
DSR

reaction

41

42

Absorption
Desorption
Absorption
Desorption

13.375
2.75
0.005
0.027

3.17 , 104
3.395 , 104
105.18
108.551

1516

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

Finally, the calculated loading-dependent enthalpy and
entropy values are used to approximate the equilibrium
pressure peq. Therefore, the Van't Hoff equation
8
> DHR;abs ðuÞ DSR;abs ðuÞ
>
þ
  >
< RT
R
peq
MH
¼
ln
>
p0
DH
ðuÞ
DS
ðuÞ
>
R;des
R;des
>
:
þ
RTMH
R

Absorption
(D.2)
Desorption

distinguishs between absorption (abs) and desorption
(des). In the equation, TMH represents the temperature of the
MH, p0 the standardized pressure, R the ideal gas constant
and, as described before, DHR and DSR the reaction enthalpy
and entropy. Eq. (D.2) describes the so called plateau region of
the typical progression of the standardized and logarithmically scaled pressure over the hydrogen load in the MH, called
pressure concentration isotherm (PCI). The plateau is limited
by steep climbs of the pressure for the nearly empty or fully
charged MH. In the modeling, the steeper increase of the
equilibrium pressure at higher hydrogen loading's during absorption and the steep decrease of the pressure for lower
hydrogen load's have to be included. Therefore, Eq. (D.2) is
adapted during absorption with
Iadd ¼ að3Þcothðað1Þðu  að2Þumax Þ2 Þ  1;

(D.3)

and the coefficient values
a ¼ ½ 12:8499 1:0197 0:1608 

(D.4)

where umax is the maximum hydrogen charging value. For
desorption the steep decreases are simplified and u is limited
to values greater than zero. With those supplements Eq. (13) is
derived.

references

[1] Ren P, Pei P, Li Y, Wu Z, Chen D, Huang S. Degradation
mechanisms of proton exchange membrane fuel cell under
typical automotive operating conditions. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2020;80:100859. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.pecs.2020.100859.
[2] de Bruijn FA, Dam VAT, Janssen GJM. Review: durability and
degradation issues of pem fuel cell components. Fuel Cell
2008;8(1):3e22. https://doi.org/10.1002/fuce.200700053.
[3] Mench M, Kumbur EC, Veziroglu TN. Polymer electrolyte fuel
cell degradation. Academic Press; 2011. https://doi.org/
10.1016/C2010-0-67819-9.
[4] Grigoriev S, Dzhus K, Bessarabov D, Millet P. Failure of pem
water electrolysis cells: case study involving anode
dissolution and membrane thinning. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2014;39(35):20440e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijhydene.2014.05.043.
[5] Wu B, Zhao M, Shi W, Liu W, Liu J, Xing D, Yao Y, Hou Z,
Ming P, Gu J, Zou Z. The degradation study of nafion/ptfe
composite membrane in pem fuel cell under accelerated
stress tests. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39(26):14381e90.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.02.142.
[6] Qiu D, Peng L, Lai X, Ni M, Lehnert W. Mechanical failure and
mitigation strategies for the membrane in a proton exchange
membrane fuel cell. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
2019;113:109289. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.109289.
[7] Pei P, Chen H. Main factors affecting the lifetime of proton
exchange membrane fuel cells in vehicle applications: a

review. Appl Energy 2014;125:60e75. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apenergy.2014.03.048.
[8] Lai YH, Dillard DA. Mechanical durability characterization
and modeling of ionomeric membranes. John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd; 2010. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470974001.f500029.
[9] Li Q, Liu Z, Sun Y, Yang S, Deng C. A review on temperature
control of proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Processes
2021;9(2). https://doi.org/10.3390/pr9020235.
[10] Amamou AA, Kelouwani S, Boulon L, Agbossou K. A
comprehensive review of solutions and strategies for cold
start of automotive proton exchange membrane fuel cells.
IEEE Access 2016;4:4989e5002. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2016.2597058.
€ lbig M,
[11] Bürger I, Sourmelis Terzopoulos V, Kretschmer C, Ko
Brack C, Linder M. Lightweight reactor design by additive
manufacturing for preheating applications using metal
hydrides. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46(56):28686e99.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.06.091.
[12] Ramezanizadeh M, Alhuyi Nazari M, Hossein Ahmadi M,
Chen L. A review on the approaches applied for cooling fuel
cells. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2019;139:517e25. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2019.05.032.
[13] Mohamed WANW, Talib SFA, Zakaria IA, Mamat AMI,
Daud WRW. Effect of dynamic load on the temperature
profiles and cooling response time of a proton exchange
membrane fuel cell. J Energy Inst 2018;91(3):349e57. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.joei.2017.02.006.
€ lbig, C. Weckerle, M. Linder, I. Bürger, Review on
[14] M. Ko
thermal applications for metal hydrides in fuel cell vehicles:
Operation modes, recent developments and crucial design
aspects, Renew Sustain Energy Rev 162. doi:https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rser.2022.112385.
[15] Lototskyy MV, Tolj I, Pickering L, Sita C, Barbir F, Yartys V.
The use of metal hydrides in fuel cell applications. Prog Nat
Sci: Mater Int 2017;27(1):3e20. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.pnsc.2017.01.008.
[16] Pfeifer P, Wall C, Jensen O, Hahn H, Fichtner M. Thermal
coupling of a high temperature pem fuel cell with a complex
hydride tank. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2009;34(8):3457e66.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2009.02.041.
[17] Urbanczyk R, Peil S, Bathen D, Heßke C, Burfeind J,
Hauschild K, Felderhoff M, Schüth F. Ht-pem fuel cell system
with integrated complex metal hydride storage tank. Fuel Cell
2011;11(6):911e20. https://doi.org/10.1002/fuce.201100012.
[18] Weiss-Ungethüm J, Bürger I, Schmidt N, Linder M, Kallo J.
Experimental investigation of a liquid cooled high
temperature proton exchange membrane (ht-pem) fuel cell
coupled to a sodium alanate tank. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2014;39(11):5931e41. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijhydene.2014.01.127.
[19] Cavo M, Gadducci E, Rattazzi D, Rivarolo M, Magistri L.
Dynamic analysis of pem fuel cells and metal hydrides on a
zero-emission ship: a model-based approach. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2021;46(64):32630e44. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijhydene.2021.07.104.
[20] Cavo Matteo, Gadducci Eleonora, Rivarolo Massimo,
Magistri Loredana, Dellacasa Andrea, Romanello Matteo, et
al. Thermal integration of pem fuel cells and metal
hydrides storage system for zero emission ultimate ship
(zeus), E3S Web. Conf 334. https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/
202233404004
[21] Weckerle C, Nasri M, Hegner R, Bürger I, Linder M. A metal
hydride air-conditioning system for fuel cell vehicles e
functional demonstration. Appl Energy 2020;259:114187.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.114187.
[22] Dieterich M, Bürger I, Linder M. Open and closed metal
hydride system for high thermal power applications:
preheating vehicle components. Int J Hydrogen Energy

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 5 0 ( 2 0 2 4 ) 1 5 0 2 e1 5 1 7

2017;42(16):11469e81. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijhydene.2017.03.024.
€ lbig M, Bürger I, Linder M. Characterization of metal
[23] Ko
hydrides for thermal applications in vehicles below zero
degree. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44(10):4878e88. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.12.116.
€ lbig M. Coupled metal hydride reactions for preheating
[24] Ko
vehicle components at low temperatures. Ph.D. thesis.
University of Stuttgart; 2018.
€ rme-und Stoffübertragung.
[25] Baehr HD, Stephan K. Wa
Springer; 2019.
[26] Ron M. The normalized pressure dependence method for the
evaluation of kinetic rates of metal hydride formation/
decomposition. J Alloys Compd 1999;283(1e2):178e91.
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0925-8388(98)00859-7.
[27] Jemni A. Study of two-dimensional heat and mass transfer
during absorption in a metal-hydrogen reactor. Int J

1517

Hydrogen Energy 1995;20(1):43e52. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0360-3199(93)e0007-8.
[28] Wagner W, Pruß A. The IAPWS formulation 1995 for the
thermodynamic properties of ordinary water substance for
general and scientific use. J Phys Chem Ref Data
2002;31(2):387e535. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1461829.
[29] Henke B. Modellgestützte automatisierte Reglerauslegung
für elektromechanische Antriebssysteme. Aachen: Shaker
Verlag; 2016.
[30] Domschke T. Gleichgewichte und
Beladungsgeschwindigkeiten eines
Niedertemperaturmetallhydrids. Ph.D. thesis. TU Berlin; 1989.
€ nderungen von Gasen und
[31] Stephan P, Stephan K. Zustandsa
€ mpfen. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2018.
Da
p. 169e71. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-54805-9_28.

