WHITE PAPER

SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS
Advanced metal hydride technology for
hydrogen storage, purification and compression
applications
June 2024
Metal hydrides are solid hydrogen carriers that can be used in multiple applications such as highpurity hydrogen storage or thermochemical hydrogen purification and compression. Fraunhofer
IFAM’s recent technological advances prove that metal hydride composites offer various
advantages over conventional metal hydrides, for example, full charge-discharge cycle times of a
few minutes.

WHITE PAPER
SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS

Authors
Dr. Mateusz BALCERZAK, Group Manager »Hydrogen Storage Technology and Systems«
Phone: +49 351 2537-331; E-mail: Mateusz.Balcerzak@ifam-dd.fraunhofer.de
Dipl.-Ing. Marius LAU, Research Fellow
Phone: +49 351 2537-320; E-mail: Marius.Lau@ifam-dd.fraunhofer.de
Dr.-Ing. Felix HEUBNER, Head of Department »Hydrogen Technology«
Phone: +49 351 2537-570; E-mail: Felix.Heubner@ifam-dd.fraunhofer.de

Affiliation
Fraunhofer Institute for Manufacturing Technology and Advanced Materials IFAM
Dresden Branch, Winterbergstraße 28, 01277 Dresden, GERMANY
https://www.ifam.fraunhofer.de/en/h2

Contents
INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... 2
METAL HYDRIDES AS SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS ................................................................. 3
METAL HYDRIDE COMPOSITES ............................................................................................... 5
METAL HYDRIDE DEVICES....................................................................................................... 7
R&D SERVICES ........................................................................................................................ 9
350 BAR HYDROGEN LABORATORY AT FRAUNHOFER IFAM .................................................... 9
CONCLUSION ........................................................................................................................11
REFERENCES ..........................................................................................................................12

1

WHITE PAPER
SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS

INTRODUCTION
The new hydrogen economy requires a
variety of storage, distribution and
dispensing technologies. Solid hydrogen
carriers (SHC) and in particular metal
hydrides (MH) are a commercially viable
alternative to compressed gas or liquid
hydrogen storage solutions. SHC allow to
safely store hydrogen with high purity
(7.0), at low pressures (1 to 40 bar), in a
very compact manner (up to 150 kg H2/m³
compared to 39 kg H2/m³ for hydrogen at
700 bar) and without boil-off or blow-off
losses (Figure 1) [GUP16]. MH bind hydrogen in a chemical way, i.e. in the event of
an unintended leak of the storage vessel,
the gas will not be released into the
surroundings all at once but at a small rate.
This ensures a high level of intrinsic
technical safety.

Figure 1: Hydrogen energy carriers in comparison (SHC: solid
hydrogen carriers; LOHC: liquid organic hydrogen carriers;
STP: standard temperature and pressure).

For some years, multiple industries have used MH for high-purity hydrogen storage applications
to run fuel cell-powered submarines, railed vehicles, stationary power devices and portable
electronics, among other things (Figure 2). Furthermore, MH are used for vibration-free
thermochemical hydrogen compressors, thermochemical heat pumps, and systems for
hydrogen purification. MH can also serve as reversible hydrogen gettering materials, thus,
selectively removing hydrogen from gas mixtures.
In application-oriented research projects, Fraunhofer IFAM has explored ways to improve metal
hydride technology comprising
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

the development of hydrogen absorbing metal alloys with optimised working gas pressure
and temperature range for storage and compression applications,
the fast activatability of MH-forming metal alloys, i.e., a fast initial hydrogen uptake, by
optimised microstructure and/or the use of catalytic species,
the increase of the durability and reliability of MH composites,
the optimization and analysis of heat and mass transfer of MH systems,
the development and testing of MH vessels,
the development of MH storage devices with high volumetric and gravimetric storage
capacity, and
the cost reduction of MH materials production and recycling.

Figure 2: Metal hydrides for hydrogen storage applications to run wheel loaders, submarines, forklift trucks, railed
vehicles, stationary power devices and portable electronics.

2

WHITE PAPER
SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS

Fraunhofer IFAM’s mission is to develop MH systems towards commercialization. Compared to
conventional MH technology that often employs highly porous MH materials in form of granules
or powders, Fraunhofer IFAM uses advanced MH composites that consist of the MH-forming metal
alloy and secondary auxiliary materials, such as graphite and/or polymers. These secondary
materials ensure that MH composites retain their shape and allow them to increase reaction
kinetics over the whole lifetime. Miniaturized sensors can be employed to determine the state-ofcharge of MH composites and to detect specific signs of degradation.

METAL HYDRIDES AS SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS
Gaseous hydrogen (H2 ) reacts at ambient or elevated temperatures with many metals or
intermetallic alloys (Me) forming solid metal hydride compounds (MeH𝑥𝑥 ). The formation of a MH
releases a chemical reaction enthalpy of several tens of kilojoules per mole of hydrogen (∆𝐻𝐻𝑅𝑅 ),
depending on the specific metal or alloy involved in the reaction (cf. Equation 1 and Figure 3). In
addition, the MH formation goes along with a slight volume expansion of the material.
𝑥𝑥
2

Me(𝑠𝑠) + H2 (𝑔𝑔) ⇌ MeH𝑥𝑥 (𝑠𝑠) + ∆𝐻𝐻𝑅𝑅

(1)

Figure 3: Metal–hydrogen interaction with steps towards the formation of a metal hydride (schematic). The hydride
formation is exothermal and goes along with a volume expansion.

Conversely, the dehydrogenation of MH materials, that is, the release of high-purity hydrogen
from the MH, is an endothermic process that consumes heat. This is important in the context of
fuel cells (FC), because waste heat from FC systems can be used to release hydrogen from MH
storage devices, thereby, reducing the effort of FC cooling.
MH formation and decomposition are closely related to the hydrogen gas pressure and the
temperature in the reaction zone (Figure 3). After adsorption of hydrogen on the surface of the
metal, hydrogen dissociates and diffuses into the metal lattice forming a lattice gas. After
saturation, the MH phase nucleates and grows. The thermodynamics of hydride formation can be
described by pressure-concentration-isotherms (PCT) and the derived van´t Hoff plot (Figure 4). A
PCT curve shows a characteristic plateau for hydrogen absorption and desorption. Here, the solid
solution (lattice gas) and the MH phase coexist. The plateau pressure for absorption and
desorption are temperature dependent. The PCT curve characteristics are very important for all

3

WHITE PAPER
SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS

MH applications. For example, in the plateau region hydrogen uptake and release go along with
small pressure changes at a given temperature. On the other hand, the plateau gas pressure
increases exponentially with increasing temperature. This relation can be used for hydrogen
compression applications as follows: The MH is formed at a low temperature and at low pressure.
Then the valves of the storage compartment are closed and the temperature is slightly increased,
thus, the pressure is rising and hydrogen can be released from the again open compartment at
high pressure. For example, according to the PCT in Figure 4, the MH forms at 25 °C (298 K) and
at 15 bar. At 100 °C (373 K), hydrogen is released at 78 bar. In this example, a 25 % temperature
increase triggers a 520 % pressure increase!

Figure 4: Pressure and temperature dependence of hydride formation and decomposition (here: Ti-Mn alloy [HER13]):
A – Pressure-concentration-isotherms (PCT); B – corresponding van´t Hoff plots for hydrogen absorption and desorption.

The PCT curves and the derived van´t Hoff plots are unique fingerprints for every metal alloy
composition and the respective MH. Metallurgy allows the production of metal alloys with tailored
temperature and pressure characteristics. Thus, MH materials for various applications with specific
properties can be prepared. The following table lists a small selection of technically important MH
materials with indicated medium working temperature and pressure for hydrogen release:
Material
FeTiH2 – FeTi
TiMn2H3 – TiMn2
LaNi5H6 – LaNi5
MgH2 – Mg
Mg2NiH4 – Mg2Ni

Temperature [°C]
25
25
25
300
300

Pressure [bar]
4
8
2
2
4

Commercial MH storage devices are available with a wide range of hydrogen storage capacities –
from a few normal liters (portable cartridges) to several hundred normal cubic meters (stationary
storage). Most MH storage devices have modular designs. They consist of one or more pressure
containers (modules) holding the MH material that traditionally comes in form of lumps, granules,
or powders. Inside each module, some free space is mandatory to counteract the volume
expansion of the MH-forming material, thus, preventing additional mechanical stress on the
container walls. Nevertheless, powder-based approaches have various drawbacks in view of the
usable space, the effective heat and mass flows and, thereby, on the storage dynamics.
Fast hydrogen uptake and release cycles can be guaranteed if the heat of the chemical reaction is
quickly transported inside and away from the reaction zone. The heat transfer characteristics
4

WHITE PAPER
SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS

inside the reaction bed can be significantly improved by MH composites that consist of the MH
material and secondary materials with a high intrinsic thermal conductivity like carbon, aluminium,
or copper. The heat transfer away from the reaction bed requires suitable heat exchangers. The
long-term stability of the hydrogen uptake and release characteristics of MH devices can be
obtained by the preservation of the structural integrity of the reaction bed that can deteriorate by
multiple causes, for example, MH particle migration or crack formation in the reaction zone
lowering the effective thermal conductivity.

METAL HYDRIDE COMPOSITES
Fraunhofer IFAM has developed advanced MH composite
materials (Figure 5) that are tested in storage modules and
complete MH storage devices. These modern concepts provide
more durable, more stable, and thus safer and less expensive
MH storage and compression solutions than are available
today. Special R&D focus is on the relation between the MHforming metal alloys, the secondary auxiliary materials such as
carbon or aluminium, and the internal structure that unites all
these materials in one composite material with tailored
properties that are relevant for a specific application:
•
•
•
•

Figure 5: Metal hydride composites.

Hydrogen storage capacity (volumetric and gravimetric),
working temperature and gas pressure of the MH device,
fast hydrogen absorption and desorption kinetics by tailored thermal conductivity, and
high mechanical stability of the MH composites throughout cycling and therewith lowest
material degradation.

The first step on the route towards MH composites with tailored properties is to employ
metallurgical processes to produce the hydride-forming metal alloys in form of fine particles with
specific physical and chemical properties [KAL09, KAL10]. These processes include atomization of
a metallic melt, melt spinning, electrolytic extraction, mechanical alloying, grinding and
decrepitation. Thereafter, the master alloy particles are homogeneously blended with the
secondary auxiliary materials, for example graphite, aluminium flakes or polymers, before being
compacted by uniaxial pressing into composites of a defined geometrical shape (Figure 6 and
Figure 7) [POH10, POH13, POH15].

5

WHITE PAPER
SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS

Figure 6: Schematic of MH composite production combining a MH-forming metal alloy and secondary auxiliary materials
with highest thermal conductivity and other functional properties.

Figure 7: Arrangement of metal hydride composites made of different materials and with different parameters.
Subfigure A (from left to right): Mg-, TiMn2-, LiNH2- and NaAlH4-based composites. Subfigure B: TiMn2-based
composites processed in Ar atmosphere. Subfigure C: TiMn2-based composites manufactured at ambient air.

The secondary auxiliary materials can serve three main purposes:
1. They enhance the structural integrity and raise process efficiency when the material
mixture is being compacted.
2. They improve the hydrogen uptake dynamics by increasing the effective thermal
conductivity (typical target values are between 5 and 30 W/(m⋅K).
3. They provide the reaction zone with much greater mechanical stability to withstand the
volume changes that occur during hydrogen uptake and release.

6

WHITE PAPER
SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS

Research has shown graphite to be especially suitable as a
secondary auxiliary material as it provides the highest return
with the least effort. For example, heat conductivities of
several tens of W/(m∙K) can be achieved using a few
mass-% of expanded natural graphite (ENG) as secondary
auxiliary material. Interestingly, the internal structure of
MH-ENG composites is anisotropic due to the compaction
process (Figure 8) which can be beneficial for the technical
design of MH storage containers, particularly, for the heat
exchanger layout.

METAL HYDRIDE DEVICES

Figure 8: Microscopic cross-section view
of a MgH2-ENG composite. MgH2 is
colored grey to white and the
horizontally aligned graphite is indicated
in brown color (red in false color).

MH composites with cylindrical geometry and an anisotropic internal structure are a very good
choice for rapidly responding MH storage devices. For convenience in the production process, the
tablet-shaped composites are stacked on top of each other inside a cylindrical pressure vessel.
Small radial gaps are filled as soon as the storage material begins to expand during initial hydrogen
uptake. Heat is transferred mainly towards the heat exchange boundary, i.e., the outer surface of
the container (Figure 9) from where a heat transfer fluid (gas or liquid) transfers the reaction heat
further.
DESIGN
The design of a MH device is not only influenced by the type of application for which the device
will be used but also by the type of heat sinks and heat sources to which the device can be
coupled. For example, the exhaust heat of a FC can be elegantly used the trigger the endothermic
hydrogen release from the MH device if the heat flow and temperature levels are adjusted
properly.

Figure 9: A: Schematic drawing of a MH-based SHC storage module (left), including heat transfer (Q) during hydrogen
desorption. B: A 15-module storage device equipped with temperature, pressure, and filling level sensor.

7

WHITE PAPER
SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS

Typical methods for identifying and monitoring MH composite characteristics either focus on
values related to heat and mass flow (volumetric, gravimetric, or calorimetric analyses) or on
single-point measurements, for example, by inserting thermocouples into the hydride bed to
measure the temperature locally (Figure 9). For example, Figure 10-A illustrates the hydrogen
absorption and desorption characteristics of a Ti-Mn–ENG composite. From this it follows that
proper thermal management allows to charge and discharge storage devices within a few
minutes. Figure 10-B shows the same composite after 20 hydrogen uptake and release cycles. The
composite has been removed from the storage device after cycling for further analysis and
obviously exhibits a good mechanical stability.

Figure 10-A: Absorption and desorption characteristics of a Ti-Mn–ENG composite following 20 hydrogen uptake and
release cycles. Inset B shows the tested composite after cycling. The predrilled holes were used to insert thermocouples.
Figure 8-C shows the metal hydride device test rig at Fraunhofer IFAM (in-house development).

VOLUME EXPANSION
The hydride formation goes along with a material-specific volume expansion between 10 and
30 vol.-%. Consequently, MH increase their volume during hydrogen uptake, too, although the
degree of expansion depends not only on the kind of materials used but also on the internal
structure of the composite. For example, pores inside the composite can partly or even fully
accommodate the volume change. Furthermore, an anisotropic internal structure can lead to
directional dependence of the expansion. Nevertheless, the hydrogen uptake generates stress on
the composite material from which mechanical forces may act on the pressure vessel walls. For
system safety, the forces need to be monitored and must be considered in the design of the
pressure vessel. Fraunhofer IFAM has successfully developed and applied several ways to quantify
stresses inside MH composites and the resulting forces acting on walls of MH storage devices
[HEU15a, HEU17, HEU18].

8

WHITE PAPER
SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS

STATE-OF-CHARGE
Due to the PCT characteristics, particularly the flat plateau region,
gas pressure measurements are unreliable to determine the filling
level (state-of-charge) of MH materials in dynamic applications.
Fraunhofer IFAM invented a dynamic filling level sensor for MH
devices that is based on the measurement of internal stresses in
MH composites that evolve during hydrogen uptake and release
[HEU15b]. This sensor can also provide information on
degradation effects of the hydrogen storage material, for example
due to gas impurities, which is beneficial to predict the lifetime of
the hydrogen storage material.
Current R&D at Fraunhofer IFAM focuses on designing and
evaluating of miniaturized sensors. Prototypes with diameters of
less than 1.6 cm (0.63 inch) have already been produced and
successfully tested in the laboratory (Figure 11).

Figure 11: State-of-charge sensor
for MH storage devices.

R&D SERVICES
Fraunhofer IFAM provides interdisciplinary expertise and all-inclusive know-how on metal hydride
technology. The spectrum of our R&D services comprises paper studies (technical design studies,
literature and patent search, freedom-to-operate analyses, value-added chain analyses including
and life cycle cost analyses) as well as technical projects (preparation and testing of MH materials,
design and testing of MH storage devices, system integration of MH storage devices into FCs
systems and testing thereof).
Please contact us for more details.

350 BAR HYDROGEN LABORATORY AT FRAUNHOFER IFAM
Since 2008, Fraunhofer IFAM invests into a 350 bar Hydrogen laboratory for the development of
sorption materials. Last installations were done in 2022. The following equipment is reserved for
development of metal hydrides and R&D services:
Equipment
Membrane Compressor (Diekers)
Piston compressor (HDT)
PCT Pro (Setaram)
GasPro HA (KEP, Setaram)

Characteristics
350 bar max. output pressure,
Hydrogen purity 6.0
200 bar max. output pressure, Hydrogen
purity 5.0
Sieverts apparatus (PCT) for determination
of pressure composition isotherms.
(200 bar 400°C)
Sieverts apparatus (PCT) for determination
of pressure composition isotherms,
molecular vacuum pump installed
(200 bar, 400°C)

9

WHITE PAPER
SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS

ISOSORP® Gas HP-Flow II (Rubotherm)
Rubotherm Series IsoSORP SA (Waters GmbH)

novoclav (büchiglasuster)

Thermogravimetric suspension balance for
determination of kinetics and cycle stability
(200 bar, 400°C)
Thermogravimetric suspension balance for
determination of kinetics and cycle stability,
several gas inlets for gas mixtures etc,
molecular vacuum pump installed
(350 bar, 400°C)
Stirred batch reactor for hydrogenation of
metals, inner volume 600 ml (450°C, 200 bar)

Further equipment is used for alloy synthesis:
Equipment
2 x Glovebox Ar (M. Braun)
Arc melting devices:
MAM-1 (Edmund Bühler),
AM 500 (Edmund Bühler)
Induction melting devices

Function
Sample preparation in inert atmosphere
Melting of up to 500 g (Fe-based) with
cooled Cu crucible and suction casting option
Several induction melting devices with
different crucibles are used for melting of
reactive alloys

Please contact us for more details.

Figure 12: Impressions of the 350 bar Hydrogen laboratory at Fraunhofer IFAM in Dresden.

10

WHITE PAPER
SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS

CONCLUSION
Solid hydrogen carriers like metal hydrides offer advantages compared to state-of-the-art high
pressure or liquid hydrogen storage technology. Because hydrogen is chemically bound to a host
metal, the volumetric storage density can go up to 150 kg H2/m³ at low operation pressures in the
order of 1 to 40 bar. Metal hydrides can be used for hydrogen storage, hydrogen purification and
thermochemical hydrogen compression.
Advanced metal hydride composites that are manufactured using a simple production process
have distinct advantages over conventional powder or granular materials, for example, in view of
operation dynamics and system storage density. Modern metal hydride devices allow hydrogen
uptake and release cycles in the order of a few minutes only. The safe operation of metal hydride
devices can be improved with thermomechanical sensors that determine the state-of-charge as
well as degradation effects.

11

WHITE PAPER
SOLID HYDROGEN CARRIERS

REFERENCES
[GUP16] Gupta, R. B., Basile, A., Veziroğlu, T. N. (Eds.). (2016). Compendium of Hydrogen Energy,
Volume 2: Hydrogen Storage, Distribution and Infrastructure. Woodhead Publishing. ISBN 978178242-362-1.
[HAN24] Hannappel, P., Alvares, E., Heubner, F., Pistidda, C. Jerabek, P., Weißgärber, T. (2024).
Thermodynamic assessment of the Ce-H and CeNi5-H system. Calphad Journal 85, 102701.
[HER13] Herbrig, K., Röntzsch, L., Pohlmann, C., Weißgärber, T., Kieback, B. (2013). Hydrogen
storage systems based on hydride–graphite composites: computer simulation and experimental
validation. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 38 (17), 7026–7036.
[HEU15a] Heubner, F., Pohlmann, C., Mauermann, S., Kieback, B., Röntzsch, L. (2015).
Mechanical stresses originating from metal hydride composites during cyclic hydrogenation.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 40 (32), 10123-10130.
[HEU15b] Heubner, F., Pohlmann, C., Röntzsch, L., Kieback, B. (2015). Messeinrichtung und
Verfahren zur Bestimmung der Menge eines in einem Speicher aufgenommenen Gases an einem
porösen Speichermaterial. German patent DE 10 2015 100 584 B3.
[HEU17] Heubner, F., Mauermann, S., Kieback, B., Röntzsch, L. (2017). Stress development of
metal hydride composites for high density hydrogen storage applications. Journal of Alloys and
Compounds, 705, 176-182.
[HEU18] Heubner, F., Hilger, A., Kardjilov, N., Manke, I., Kieback, B., Gondek, Ł., Banhart, J.,
Röntzsch, L. (2018). In-operando stress measurement and neutron imaging of metal hydride
composites for solid-state hydrogen storage. Journal of Power Sources, 397, 262-270.
[JEH13] Jehan, M., Fruchart, D. (2013). McPhy-Energy’s proposal for solid state hydrogen storage
materials and systems. Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 580, 343-348.
[KAL09] Kalinichenka, S., Röntzsch, L. ; Kieback, B. (2009). Structural and hydrogen storage
properties of melt-spun Mg–Ni–Y alloys. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 34 (18), 7749–
7755.
[KAL10] Kalinichenka, S., Röntzsch, L., Baehtz, C., Kieback, B. (2010). Hydrogen desorption
kinetics of melt-spun and hydrogenated Mg90Ni10 and Mg80Ni10Y10 using in situ synchrotron, X-ray
diffraction and thermogravimetry. Journal of Alloys and Compounds 496 (1–2), 608–613.
[LAU24] Lau, M., Ehrensberger, O., Weißgärber, T., Heubner, F. (2024).Impact of hydride
composite materials on thermochemical hydrogen compression. International Journal of Hydrogen
Energy 71, 562-570.
[POH10] Pohlmann, C., Röntzsch, L., Kalinichenka, S., Hutsch, T., Kieback, B. (2010). Magnesium
alloy-graphite composites with tailored heat conduction properties for hydrogen storage
applications. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 35 (23), 12829–12836.
[POH13] Pohlmann, C., Röntzsch, L., Heubner, F., Weißgärber, T., Kieback, B. (2013). Solid-state
hydrogen storage in Hydralloy–graphite composites. Journal of Power Sources 231, 97–105.
[POH15] Pohlmann, C., Herbrig, K., Gondek, Ł. Kardjilov, N., Hilger, A., Figiel, H., Banhart, J.,
Kieback B., Manke, I., Röntzsch, L. (2015). In operando visualization of hydride-graphite
composites during cyclic hydrogenation by high-resolution neutron imaging. Journal of Power
Sources 277, 360–369.
12

